---
title: PIT 0.26 released
keywords: documentation
tags: release
description: PIT 0.26 released
layout: post
---

PIT 0.26 has now been released and is available from google code and maven central.

<!-- more -->

This includes the first official release of the PIT Ant task, a new experimental mutator
and a number of smaller improvements. 

There is a known issue with the new mutator, please read the notes below before you enable it.

## Ant task

Nicolas Rusconi has contributed an Ant task, originally hosted at GitHub, but now merged into the main codebase. 

The details are documented at [PIT ant documentation](/quickstart/ant)

## Member variable mutator

This new mutator removes assignments to member variables, replacing them with the default value for that type.

There is a known issue with this mutator in the this release - it will create errors when it mutates
synchronized methods.

## Fix for issues 12/27

PIT could previously be made to hang if the code under test launched non daemon threads. This has been fixed
by changing the way PIT terminates its child processes.

## Warning now issued when no test library found on classpath

This was causing a lot of confusion for people setting up PIT for the first time. If JUnit or TestNG were not
on the classpath PIT would unhelpfully report that it could not find any tests.

## Errors now raised if mutated classes have no line or source debug

Previously if classes without line debug were included PIT would report that the class was uncovered. If source file
debug was not included a NullPointerException would be thrown. An explicit check is now made that each class has the required
debug info.

## JUnit assumptions now correctly handled

Earlier versions of PIT treated assumption failures as test failures, these are now correctly handled as ignored tests.

